Amazon Echo and the Aesthetics of Whiteness  
Kritische Stellungnahme

_Phan, Theo (2021): Amazon Echo and the Aesthetics of Whiteness. In: Catalyst. Feminism, Theory, Technoscience. Vol. 5/1. Pp. 1-39._

Amazon Echo and the Aesthetics of Whiteness" by Thao N. Phan (2021) is an article that argues for how Amazon and other tech firms deploy an aesthetic of whiteness in their virtual assistant products like Alexa. This whiteness is produced by constructing the brand of Alexa with aesthetics of the 'house servant' to appeal to a middle-class identity and the way it is marketed as a helpful and subservient personal assistant. The author argues that this aesthetic of whiteness reinforces existing power structures and perpetuates harmful stereotypes.

At the same time, Phan argues that Alexa’s presentation as a white, professional woman perpetuates a belief in whiteness as the ‘default’ state of identity while at the same time erasing the racialized historicities of house servants in a colonial context.

In this way, Phan enters a new and important territory in the discussion around AI and Gender/Race, as the academic discourse surrounding this topic previously concentrated on the gendered dimension of the presentation of the interface as predominantly female, reproducing the position of the feminine as the housebound assistant, Phan also rightly points out the reproduction, reemergence and reconfiguration of structures of a colonial middle-class household that employed house-servants.  
Simultanously, Phan describes exploitative labor relations that exist in conjunction with Amazon’s Alexa as the workers assembling the product, shipping the product and testing the product/feeding it with data are obfuscated. The functionality of ‘assistance’ is really just a veneer for the true business model of data-extraction and interfacing with the household to turn the household itself into the servant for Amazon’s data-machine.

In this critical paper I want to pick up on Phan’s economic critique and add that the aesthetic of whiteness employed by Amazon’s Echo, and similar tech-gadgets, is a ‘default’ aesthetic with all the significance of the meaning of ‘default’. An important technical capability of Tech-gadgets are their customizability. An aesthetic of whiteness employed in the marketing of Amazon speaks to the main target-group of white middle class people, but the device itself can be customized. It is well within the capability of the device to program in a new style of voice, a new name and entirely new voice lines for a completely different personality through the built in API (Application Programming Interface). This functionality doesn’t constitute a ‘hacking’ of the device, it’s built into the device itself and is a supported function. These modular programs are called ‘skills’ which can be downloaded as community-created content, much like Apps in an App-Store.

This doesn’t mean that Amazon acts socially conscious through this customizability. On the contrary. I’m arguing that the customizability constitutes the systematization of difference from the ‘default’ state of whiteness and the solidification of this default state through the brand-community. Picking up on Phan’s historic example of colonial house-servants, the brand-community could be compared to the white skilled labor-force that was subordinated to the white landowning class but dominant to the class of enslaved, racialized people. On the one hand, like Phan writes, this brand-community writes and votes on the reviews for Amazon’s products, further solidifying and reproducing the racial and gendered language within Amazons branding (p. 16). Additionally, the brand-community creates and curates the modifications that can be downloaded on Alexa’s ‘Skills’ Store. While there are no rules in place banning any group of people specifically, it’s still a semi-open system through community self-moderation. The community moderates and homogenizes itself according to the ‘default’ identity that builds the stable core of the community.

An example of this dynamism can be seen by searching the tab ‘Religion and lifestyle’ in the German Alexa Skill catalogue which reveals a plethora of christian apps. For example some which read the commandmants, reading table-prayers, religious podcasts, information about service-times for specific churches etc. Searching for ‘Islam’ in this tab reveals just 3 apps, one of which is bombarded with 1-star ratings from users, many of them making islamophobic statements.

Customizability theoretically opens up endless possibilities that should reflect diversity. After all, if one doesn’t feel represented in the aesthetics of technical capabilities of the device, why not just download an app for your needs?

The problem is the ‘default state’ of a particular technical ecosystem. The default identity defines the borders of the acceptable within a particular ecosystems and interprets the permitted differences. This default state is governed through the brand-community that forms around the default identity by identifying with the default identity. The brand-community, formed around the default identity will be the user-group that uses the device most extensively and actively, putting in the most labor by providing feedback for an ‘improved’ user-experience, further solidifying the default identity.

This is a wider problem emerging in community-based capitalism’s faux-diversity. Brand-communities are theoretically open but practically closed systems that are decentrally governed. In many ways, the brand-community around the default-identity governs the brand’s further development much more than the central marketing department of the company, which merely steers the default identity under which a community forms.

This is a double-problematic dynamic. On the one hand, it means that the actual labor involved in the production of the device is further alienated from the product, as the brand community will take on most the work of testing and further developing features for the device, developing the device more for the needs of the brand-community instead of the people involved in the manufacturing of the device.

On the other hand, it means that the default identities hegemonic position is further solidified in wider society and alternatives are further suppressed as the cost of development for an alternative product increases, as more and more people’s lives become entangled with the device’s interface, making the switch to an alternative product increasingly costly and the systems and modulations developed with the brand-community increasingly complex.

However, this is exactly why it is necessary to keep up a diversity of technological systems in order to reflect the diversity of communities and realities in a plural society. To realize this, technological education and accessibility of tools for the development of technologies should be a top priority.

_Jay Rathjen_